---
layout: post
title: Demystifying the Build vs Buy Equation
---

As a maker the most challenging part of any project where you are replicating a product is evaluating the hidden and elusive build vs buy equation. This is a challenge for many and the more complex the project the more complex this equation becomes as it doesn't just involve cost. Unfortunately the right answer can be highly elusive and even with careful consideration this can be evaluated incorrectly. 

This "equation" involves four parts. Your wallet, your tools, your mind, and your time.

The Wallet: The first step when trying to DIY a product that is commercially available is to analyze the monetary benefit of building your own. Sometimes the cost of buying an object in pieces and assembling it yourself is cheaper than the finished product. Sometimes you have parts that you would need already. A good example would be the electric skateboard my girlfriend is working on. An electric skateboard can get quite expensive, a good one may cost anywhere between $500 to $1000. However she was able to find a wheel kit for about $50, a rc kit for another $50, all in a budget of $150 would be reasonable. Sometimes this part element of the equation is easy to determine and sometimes it isn't. Certain parts may be unavailable, more expensive or you may have to make them yourself. Sometimes there may be hidden costs to a project outside the materials themselves, more on this bellow. The weight of cost can be pretty heavy however if your main motivator is that you can't afford something without DIY then you better make sure you can afford the DIY version. Nothing sucks more than having half a project sitting in storage.

The Tools: Do you have the equipment to complete the project? Do you need to buy new tools? Do you have access to cnc machines? Recently I started metal casting and the foundry was not a very tool heavy build, but I was attempting it on a tight budget and had to rationalize the purchase of a hole-saw for what was essentially a one time use. I just sort of grabbed what they had at the hardware store so I doubt it was the cheapest but there was no way to finish the project without it. I've used the hole-saw once again when drilling holes to run cables so I don't regret the purchase. However some projects may prescribe you to buy many one-time use tools, in which case you may need to get creative as to how you can avoid using these. Some projects require the use of complex machinery which you may need to consider if you have access to or if you can substitute this functionality. Actually the casting project was a sub-project to the one wheel replica project. I don't currently have access to the university maker space so I'm attempting to "substitute" castings for cnc machined parts. Even if these parts don't quite fit the project, being able to cast and then later finish machine parts should give me more flexibility on the parts I make for future projects.

The Mind: What knowledge is required for you to complete this project? That is the question you need to ask yourself. If this a bolt together project like a kit or carpentry maybe not so much. However if you're attempting to build a 6 DOF robot arm you better have at least a grasp on inverse kinematics or be able to find a good tutorial. There is nothing wrong with taking on a challenging project that will require you to learn something, in fact that is a favorable outcome. You need to make sure you're not going in out of your depth. I'm not a computer scientist, but I know some programming. For example I've never attempted a project requiring a PID loop but I think that's something I can find adequate resources online for and I'm comfortable with it. However I wouldn't attempt something that involved computer vision and deep learning because I would likely be stuck reading documentation for hours just to figure out what knobs to turn and if I got something to work I wouldn't know how to make it better. Not saying I would never try something like that, I may in the future, though I need to do a lot of research just to be able to start, and that can take up a lot of...

Time: This is a real hard thing to estimate sometimes and has also been the largest killer of my projects. Overestimating the amount of time I have to dedicate to a project or underestimating the amount of time a project will take is fatal to many projects. I've begun asking myself: Can you do this in an afternoon? Can you do this in a week? A month? A year? Broadening the terms allows me to make better decisions on what projects I start and which ones I skip. I'm currently finishing up a long term project and I would rather be done with it than start new ones. You need to also consider how you value your time. Sure you may be able to build something for less out of pocket than the product but if it takes you way longer to get the finished product are you actually getting any value? Sometimes this also works in reverse. Maybe you have the materials on hand and you can finish a project before a company would be able to ship you their version of it. 

There you have it, what I consider to be the four elements of the Build vs Buy equation. The exact weights of each of these parts vary from project to project but these four components are always present.